README.md, before:

# CO2 Digital Twin: India CO2 Monitoring & Planning Tool

A 3D interactive dashboard for monitoring and simulating CO2 levels across India. This application leverages CesiumJS for 3D geospatial visualization, providing real time and baseline data analysis to support urban planning and environmental interventions.

> **Smart India Hackathon 2025 – Grand Finale**
>
> Developed in response to **Problem Statement ID 25222**, presented by the **Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology**.

## Overview

The CO2 Digital Twin provides a comprehensive view of CO2 data, combining varying sources:
*   **Baseline Data**: Historic sensor data.
*   **Satellite Data**: NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index), Albedo, and LULC (Land Use Land Cover) data. *Note: This data is derived from Google Earth Engine but used as static files in this repository.*
*   **Live Simulation**: Interactive manipulation of environmental factors to simulate CO2 reduction strategies.

## Tools & Technologies

*   **Frontend**: HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript (Vanilla).
*   **Visualization**: CesiumJS (3D Globe), Plotly.js (Charts).
*   **Backend**: Python (Flask).
*   **Database**: SQLite (`users.db`, `activities.db`).
*   **Data Processing**: Pandas, NumPy.
*   **Satellite Data**: Google Earth Engine (MODIS/Landsat).
*   **Weather Data**: OpenWeatherMap API, CPCB (Central Pollution Control Board).
*   **Reporting**: ReportLab (PDF Generation).

## Features

*   **3D National Context**: Interactive 3D globe visualizing CO2 hotspots.
*   **Intervention Simulation**: Simulate the impact of roadside capture units, vertical gardens, and biofilters.
*   **Play Mode**: Manually manipulate environmental variables (NDVI, Wind Speed, Mixing Height) to see projected efficiency changes.
*   **PWA Support**: Installable as a Progressive Web App on mobile and desktop.
*   **Admin Dashboard**: Dedicated interface for monitoring user activities and interventions.
*   **Secure Data**: Encrypted dataset handling and secure API key management.

## Setup & Installation

### Prerequisites

*   Python 3.8 or higher
*   Google Earth Engine Account (if regenerating satellite data)

### Installation

1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone <repository_url>
    cd <repository_directory>
    ```
    *Alternatively, you can download the repository as a ZIP file and extract it.*

2.  **Install dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```
    ```
    *(Note: This installs all core dependencies including `flask`, `pandas`, `reportlab` (for PDFs), and `earthengine-api` (for satellite data tools).)*

3.  **Environment Configuration:**
    The application automatically loads configuration from a `.env` file. Ensure this file contains:
    *   `DATA_FERNET_KEY`: Key for decrypting datasets.
    *   `FLASK_SECRET_KEY`: Secret key for session management.
    *   `INTEGRITY_SECRET`: Secret for station data validation.
    *   `OPENWEATHER_API_KEY`: API key for weather data.
    *   `OPENAQ_API_KEY`: API key for OpenAQ data.
    *   `CESIUM_ION_TOKEN`: Token for CesiumJS.

    *Note: For shared instances, the configuration is embedded in `app_config.bin` and loaded automatically if `.env` is missing.*

## Running the Application

### Local Development

1.  **Start the Main Application:**
    ```bash
    python app.py
    ```
    *This starts the web server for the main application, including the 3D visualization.*

2.  **Access the Dashboard (3D Map):**
    Open your browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.

### Remote Access via Ngrok

To expose the application securely to the internet (e.g., for mobile PWA testing):

1.  **Install Ngrok:**
    Download and install from [ngrok.com](https://ngrok.com/download), or use a package manager:
    ```bash
    choco install ngrok  # Windows (Chocolatey)
    ```

2.  **Authenticate Ngrok:**
    ```bash
    ngrok config add-authtoken <your_auth_token>
    ```

3.  **Run Ngrok:**
    Open a terminal and run:
    ```bash
    ngrok http 5000
    ```
    Copy the forwarding URL (e.g., `https://xxxx-xxxx.ngrok-free.app`) and open it on your mobile device.

## Admin Dashboard

A separate administrative interface tracks user interventions and reported activities.

1.  **Start the Admin Server:**
    Open a new terminal, navigate to the project root, and run:
    ```bash
    cd backend
    python app.py
    ```
    *Note: This runs a separate Flask instance on port **5001**.*

2.  **Access the Dashboard:**
    Open your browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5001`.

## Future Scope: 3D City Map (OSM)

*Note: This feature is currently a standalone prototype and is not integrated into the main dashboard.*

A high-fidelity, first-person view of the city (Delhi) using detailed 3D building models derived from OpenStreetMap (OSM) data.

### Features
*   **Fly-through Mode**: Navigate the city in first-person view using WASD + Mouse (FPS style).
*   **Detailed Geometry**: Renders actual building shapes and heights using GLB models.
*   **Station markers**: Visualizes pollution monitoring stations as markers within the context of the 3D city model.

### Technologies Used
*   **Frontend**: Three.js (WebGL renderer), PointerLockControls (Navigation).
*   **Backend**: Flask (Separate instance for serving models).
*   **Data Source**: OpenStreetMap (OSM) converted to GLB format (`new_delhi_india_city_and_urban.glb`).

### How to Run
1.  **Stop the Main Application**:
    Since this prototype also uses port 5000, ensure the main `app.py` is stopped.

2.  **Navigate to the Directory**:
    ```bash
    cd 3DMap_OSM/Map
    ```

3.  **Start the Server**:
    ```bash
    python app.py
    ```

4.  **Explore**:
    Open your browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`. Click on the screen to lock the mouse and use WASD keys to fly around.

## Security & Integrity

*   **Encryption**: Sensitive source datasets (`csv`) are encrypted (`.enc`) using Fernet symmetric encryption. The application only decrypts them in memory at runtime.
*   **Key Management**: All API keys and secrets are loaded from environment variables and never hardcoded in the source.
*   **Data Integrity**: Station data snapshots are signed using HMAC SHA256 (`_compute_station_integrity_token`) to prevent tampering during transmission.
*   **Secure Injection**: The Cesium Ion token is securely injected into the frontend template by the backend, preventing exposure in static files.

## Project Structure

*   `app.py`: Main Flask application entry point.
*   `backend/`: Contains the Admin Dashboard application.
*   `static/`: CSS, JavaScript, and asset files.
*   `templates/`: HTML templates (Jinja2).
*   `encrypted/`: Encrypted dataset files.
*   `tools/`: Utility scripts for data encryption (`encrypt_datasets.py`) and fetching satellite data from Google Earth Engine (`get_station_env_factors.py`).

Commit message:

Update readme - glfs model help

README.md, after:

# CO2 Digital Twin: India CO2 Monitoring & Planning Tool

A 3D interactive dashboard for monitoring and simulating CO2 levels across India. This application leverages CesiumJS for 3D geospatial visualization, providing real time and baseline data analysis to support urban planning and environmental interventions.

> **Smart India Hackathon 2025 – Grand Finale**
>
> Developed in response to **Problem Statement ID 25222**, presented by the **Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology**.

## Overview

The CO2 Digital Twin provides a comprehensive view of CO2 data, combining varying sources:
*   **Baseline Data**: Historic sensor data.
*   **Satellite Data**: NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index), Albedo, and LULC (Land Use Land Cover) data. *Note: This data is derived from Google Earth Engine but used as static files in this repository.*
*   **Live Simulation**: Interactive manipulation of environmental factors to simulate CO2 reduction strategies.

## Tools & Technologies

*   **Frontend**: HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript (Vanilla).
*   **Visualization**: CesiumJS (3D Globe), Plotly.js (Charts).
*   **Backend**: Python (Flask).
*   **Database**: SQLite (`users.db`, `activities.db`).
*   **Data Processing**: Pandas, NumPy.
*   **Satellite Data**: Google Earth Engine (MODIS/Landsat).
*   **Weather Data**: OpenWeatherMap API, CPCB (Central Pollution Control Board).
*   **Reporting**: ReportLab (PDF Generation).

## Features

*   **3D National Context**: Interactive 3D globe visualizing CO2 hotspots.
*   **Intervention Simulation**: Simulate the impact of roadside capture units, vertical gardens, and biofilters.
*   **Play Mode**: Manually manipulate environmental variables (NDVI, Wind Speed, Mixing Height) to see projected efficiency changes.
*   **PWA Support**: Installable as a Progressive Web App on mobile and desktop.
*   **Admin Dashboard**: Dedicated interface for monitoring user activities and interventions.
*   **Secure Data**: Encrypted dataset handling and secure API key management.

## Setup & Installation

### Prerequisites

*   Python 3.8 or higher
*   Google Earth Engine Account (if regenerating satellite data)

### Installation

1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone <repository_url>
    cd <repository_directory>
    ```
    *Alternatively, you can download the repository as a ZIP file and extract it.*

2.  **Install dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```
    *Note: This installs all core dependencies including `flask`, `pandas`, `reportlab` (for PDFs), and `earthengine-api` (for satellite data tools).*

3.  **Environment Configuration:**
    The application automatically loads configuration from a `.env` file. Ensure this file contains:
    *   `DATA_FERNET_KEY`: Key for decrypting datasets.
    *   `FLASK_SECRET_KEY`: Secret key for session management.
    *   `INTEGRITY_SECRET`: Secret for station data validation.
    *   `OPENWEATHER_API_KEY`: API key for weather data.
    *   `OPENAQ_API_KEY`: API key for OpenAQ data.
    *   `CESIUM_ION_TOKEN`: Token for CesiumJS.

    *Note: For shared instances, the configuration is embedded in `app_config.bin` and loaded automatically if `.env` is missing.*

## Running the Application

### Local Development

1.  **Start the Main Application:**
    ```bash
    python app.py
    ```
    *This starts the web server for the main application, including the 3D visualization.*

2.  **Access the Dashboard (3D Map):**
    Open your browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.

### Remote Access via Ngrok

To expose the application securely to the internet (e.g., for mobile PWA testing):

1.  **Install Ngrok:**
    Download and install from [ngrok.com](https://ngrok.com/download), or use a package manager:
    ```bash
    choco install ngrok  # Windows (Chocolatey)
    ```

2.  **Authenticate Ngrok:**
    ```bash
    ngrok config add-authtoken <your_auth_token>
    ```

3.  **Run Ngrok:**
    Open a terminal and run:
    ```bash
    ngrok http 5000
    ```
    Copy the forwarding URL (e.g., `https://xxxx-xxxx.ngrok-free.app`) and open it on your mobile device.

## Admin Dashboard

A separate administrative interface tracks user interventions and reported activities.

1.  **Start the Admin Server:**
    Open a new terminal, navigate to the project root, and run:
    ```bash
    cd backend
    python app.py
    ```
    *Note: This runs a separate Flask instance on port **5001**.*

2.  **Access the Dashboard:**
    Open your browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5001`.

## Future Scope: 3D City Map (OSM)

*Note: This feature is currently a standalone prototype and is not integrated into the main dashboard.*

A high-fidelity, first-person view of the city (Delhi) using detailed 3D building models derived from OpenStreetMap (OSM) data.

### Features
*   **Fly-through Mode**: Navigate the city in first-person view using WASD + Mouse (FPS style).
*   **Detailed Geometry**: Renders actual building shapes and heights using GLB models.
*   **Station markers**: Visualizes pollution monitoring stations as markers within the context of the 3D city model.

### Technologies Used
*   **Frontend**: Three.js (WebGL renderer), PointerLockControls (Navigation).
*   **Backend**: Flask (Separate instance for serving models).
*   **Data Source**: OpenStreetMap (OSM) converted to GLB format (`new_delhi_india_city_and_urban.glb`).

### How to Run
1.  **Stop the Main Application**:
    Since this prototype also uses port 5000, ensure the main `app.py` is stopped.

2.  **Navigate to the Directory**:
    ```bash
    cd 3DMap_OSM/Map
    ```

3.  **Start the Server**:
    ```bash
    python app.py
    ```

4.  **Explore**:
    Open your browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`. Click on the screen to lock the mouse and use WASD keys to fly around.

### Troubleshooting: Model Loading Error

If you see an error like `SyntaxError: Unexpected token 'v', "version ht"...` in the console and the model fails to load, it means the `new_delhi_india_city_and_urban.glb` file is a **Git LFS pointer file** (text) instead of the actual 3D model. This happens if Git LFS was not installed or properly initialized during the clone.

**Solution:**

You must download the actual binary file (~115 MB).

**Method 1: Using Git LFS (Recommended)**
Open your terminal in the project root and run:
```bash
git lfs install
git lfs pull
```

**Method 2: Manual Download (Powershell)**
If `git lfs` fails or is not available, you can download the file directly using PowerShell:
```powershell
Invoke-WebRequest -Uri "https://github.com/Dhiptanshu/CO2DigitalTwin/raw/main/3DMap_OSM/Map/models/new_delhi_india_city_and_urban.glb" -OutFile "3DMap_OSM\Map\models\new_delhi_india_city_and_urban.glb"
```

## Security & Integrity

*   **Encryption**: Sensitive source datasets (`csv`) are encrypted (`.enc`) using Fernet symmetric encryption. The application only decrypts them in memory at runtime.
*   **Key Management**: All API keys and secrets are loaded from environment variables and never hardcoded in the source.
*   **Data Integrity**: Station data snapshots are signed using HMAC SHA256 (`_compute_station_integrity_token`) to prevent tampering during transmission.
*   **Secure Injection**: The Cesium Ion token is securely injected into the frontend template by the backend, preventing exposure in static files.

## Project Structure

*   `app.py`: Main Flask application entry point.
*   `backend/`: Contains the Admin Dashboard application.
*   `static/`: CSS, JavaScript, and asset files.
*   `templates/`: HTML templates (Jinja2).
*   `encrypted/`: Encrypted dataset files.
*   `tools/`: Utility scripts for data encryption (`encrypt_datasets.py`) and fetching satellite data from Google Earth Engine (`get_station_env_factors.py`).
